CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

Use this script as your pre-commit hook (`.git/hooks/pre-commit`) to
auto-execute flake8 and isort checker:

``` sh
#!/bin/sh

if git rev-parse --verify HEAD >/dev/null 2>&1
then
	against=HEAD
else
	# Initial commit: diff against an empty tree object
	against=$(git hash-object -t tree /dev/null)
fi

# If you want to allow non-ASCII filenames set this variable to true.
allownonascii=$(git config --bool hooks.allownonascii)

# Redirect output to stderr.
exec 1>&2

# Cross platform projects tend to avoid non-ASCII filenames; prevent
# them from being added to the repository. We exploit the fact that the
# printable range starts at the space character and ends with tilde.
if [ "$allownonascii" != "true" ] &&
	# Note that the use of brackets around a tr range is ok here, (it's
	# even required, for portability to Solaris 10's /usr/bin/tr), since
	# the square bracket bytes happen to fall in the designated range.
	test $(git diff --cached --name-only --diff-filter=A -z $against |
	  LC_ALL=C tr -d '[ -~]\0' | wc -c) != 0
then
	cat <<\EOF
Error: Attempt to add a non-ASCII file name.

This can cause problems if you want to work with people on other platforms.

To be portable it is advisable to rename the file.

If you know what you are doing you can disable this check using:

  git config hooks.allownonascii true
EOF
	exit 1
fi

python_files=$(git diff --staged --name-only $against | grep -E '\.py$')
if [ -n "$python_files" ]; then
    # Flake8
    exec flake8 $python_files
    # Isort
    exec python3 -m isort -c $python_files
fi

# If there are whitespace errors, print the offending file names and fail.
exec git diff-index --check --cached $against --
```

Commit message:

docs: Improve CONTRIBUTING with TDD

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

## Test Driven Development

In other words, create your test first, then code.
Of course, this paradigm may be adapted for you to accomplish both
tasks at the same time... but you cannot forget your tests!

All unit tests are functions in `.py` files within `tests`. You can
follow the existing tests to inspire yours, just be sure your test
name starts with `test_` (that's a rule for `pytest` to find them).

For now, there are some sample files you may use to test your code.
They are all placed in `tests/` folder in `.csv` or `.parquet` formats.

To run all tests, run `pytest` (or `python3 -m pytest`).

## Git Hook

Use this script as your pre-commit hook (`.git/hooks/pre-commit`) to
execute `flake8` (syntax checker) and `isort`
('import' order checker) automatically before all commits you make:

``` sh
#!/bin/sh

if git rev-parse --verify HEAD >/dev/null 2>&1
then
	against=HEAD
else
	# Initial commit: diff against an empty tree object
	against=$(git hash-object -t tree /dev/null)
fi

# If you want to allow non-ASCII filenames set this variable to true.
allownonascii=$(git config --bool hooks.allownonascii)

# Redirect output to stderr.
exec 1>&2

# Cross platform projects tend to avoid non-ASCII filenames; prevent
# them from being added to the repository. We exploit the fact that the
# printable range starts at the space character and ends with tilde.
if [ "$allownonascii" != "true" ] &&
	# Note that the use of brackets around a tr range is ok here, (it's
	# even required, for portability to Solaris 10's /usr/bin/tr), since
	# the square bracket bytes happen to fall in the designated range.
	test $(git diff --cached --name-only --diff-filter=A -z $against |
	  LC_ALL=C tr -d '[ -~]\0' | wc -c) != 0
then
	cat <<\EOF
Error: Attempt to add a non-ASCII file name.

This can cause problems if you want to work with people on other platforms.

To be portable it is advisable to rename the file.

If you know what you are doing you can disable this check using:

  git config hooks.allownonascii true
EOF
	exit 1
fi

python_files=$(git diff --staged --name-only $against | grep -E '\.py$')
if [ -n "$python_files" ]; then
    # Flake8
    exec flake8 $python_files
    # Isort
    exec python3 -m isort -c $python_files
fi

# If there are whitespace errors, print the offending file names and fail.
exec git diff-index --check --cached $against --
```
